### What is your role in the organization and in the MS2 team?
In the organization I'm working in the MS2 team which is an XFT team and I mainly have the system role in that team.
### What are your key tasks and responsibilities?
I mainly work with the systemization and that means in different ways thinking about feature that we are implementing and update requirements regarding that one. Also, I spent a lot of time participating in pre-study which is before we actually get that into our product development phase where we mainly work. I've been working with a lot of pre-studies lately.
### Have you worked here before the transformation towards agile?
Yeah.
### Were your tasks different from what you are adoing now?
Yes, a little bit, but perhaps not as much as one could think. But yeah, they were different.
### And now, in the agile environment, would you say that your responsibilities are clearly defined, your personally and XFT as a whole?
I didn't understand that.
### It is clear what the team is supposed to do, where does the responsibility end and where should you delegate it to some other roles?
Yeah, it's clear but also a little bit unclear, I would say. Beacuse there are no approved process for the product development and we are really lacking that one and I think that that one is a key issue to really tell what responsibilities the team has.
### And in what way does it afffect your way as a team?
Since we don't have that PD process we are sometimes getting really frustrated beacuse we don't know in what way we should solve our tasks and we are not sure wether or not we are ready with thte whole feature.
### What can be any other impedimants for the team to work during the sprints?
Other impadiments can be that it's hard to get aahold of people that you need to get information from or confirmation or whatever, that sometimes can take very long time. I see that we sometimes don't have open ways, communication ways, towards GSM and WDCMA so we are kind of struggling when we need to know something that we are trying "Oh, perpahp we could to mail that person" or mailing another one or third one and then perpahp... So in order to get an answer we could spend long time, we are of course doing other stuff, but long calendar time before you get your answer back. Sometimes that desn't matter more than it is frustrating since you don't get your answer, but sometimes it's of course also affecting the development. It would be much better if we could get our answer a little bit earlier. The communication ways are unclear for some areas that we actually need to get confirmation from.
### Do you see any wat  of how they can be more clearly defined?
Yes, you could clearly define them. If you are wokring with that process and all teams...Well, it's different steps that you need to do. If all team need to do step number 2, for example, and you would set up a weekly meeting for that task then you could just go to that meeting and say "Hello, I have this question.", "Ok, th answer is...", "Thank you" and then you could leave. You will of course have to wait for the meeting but that's a much shorter time than 3 weeks of calendar time of mailing and much less frustrating. So one could really help out the ourganizaion in having define communication ways so to say, then it would be easier. Well, this task and you go to that room by that day oe yeah, well,  not exactly like that, but... what one usually do it that one has a forum[???] in some way and you use a mail list to that one and say "I have a question about this" and then that would updown the agenda[6:00] and you get an answer in a coule of days. It would mostly take one week or perhaps not more than 10 days if you have those communicstions and you kind of put your errand there and just wait fior the answer, you don't have to do that mailing and try to find the person and "No, this is not my responsibility". So those people in that meeting know this our responsibility to answer this question and they will do it. Bit that is...I mean it's in a way not an agile way of working beacuse you should take all the contacts you need by yourself and clearly descuss with persons in person. But whe you get such a big organisation such as we have the if every team are to  mail everyone about every tasks then it gets... We get very long lines for that converstaions. So tI thik for a bigger organisation aone really has to help out to get betwwer communication ways.
### And if somebody finds a communication path, does he kind of communicate that he fouind a responsible person say for a rangfo of issues?
Yeah. It tends to get that way but it's also, then it spreads a name in the organizarion and that person gets a lot of mails, a ,lot of questions. And it's very hard for that person to hand it over to someone else, beacuse you are kind of personal responsible for.... Everybody thinks that you are responsible, not responsible, but everybody knows that you are a good person to ask, right? So you tend to get hundreds of mails with questions. So, by that I think in a big organization it is easier to work throught different kind of foras[????], beacuse in that case it's rather, it's more easy to shift over the responsibility to anpther person. And you also could, in that case you get some kind of mailbox, those kind of issues really get a mailbox and then you "Oh, now we have 10 issues of this one". Sometimes they kind of get lost when they are on personal level in an organisation like this. So I think it's very good when you are rather few to work in that way bu when the organisation grows it's hard.
### If you were to pick 3-5 roles you communicate most frequently with, which roles would it be?
That would be OPO, the... what are they called...they are called TM...
### Technical managers?
Yeah, it's technical...Maria is one. I forgot what her role is, I can come back on that. I coommuncate with SPM, I also communicate with --- not so much with a SPM but a little bit with him. CPI, beacuse that's one of our, we have the responsibility to see that the CPI is done, we not doing it ourselves but we are putting in stuff in that and reviewing tham. How many did I say?
### 4 or 5... That's enough. Can you think of any event thats cause more communication than usually? More intense...
It varies beacuse when you are in that CPI loop you have a lot of communication with those people that are writing the CPI and all that. Then you are going in the verification loop and you have a lot of communication with the test managers regarding what to test. So it varies a lot over time.
### Do you see any role or maybe cetrain communication channel which tends to be a bottleneck in a way, that blocks the communication with other party?
Perhaps not that much, but the people that are TM in the projects, like Maria is, they are very-very busy, so there it takes long time to get confirmation. They have very-very many features to keep track of, but when something arise and hot, they are coming back, but if it's not that hot it takes long time, beacuse they have such a full load on that.
### How tight is the communication between XFT and the OPO?
How...?
### Tight? Is it on a daily basis, what do you discuss normally.
OPO is discussing, I would say daily with our Scrum Master but not daily with the rest of the team, but we perhaps twice a week or once a week with the rest of the team. So some of the team has only communication with OPO when it's sprint planning and the Scrum Master has it more or less on a daily basis´, because he comes and says something and then... So it depends on what role you have in the team. I would say that I'm talking with him 3-4 times per week, that's not daily but not far from it, some people in opur team are not talking to hima t all. So it depends on.
### So you would you say that this kind of specialization you have inside your team, like you are doing system work and someone else is doing some other specific work, does it harm your team?
No, I don't think it harms our team beacsue in my team I am the only one with competence in system. But it would be of course, it is always better if you are not the single point of knowledge, so in that case it's better to kind of be pair-working even on system stuff also. But lately, we have been working with a pre-study that all three teams in APC is involved in and then of course have 1 in each team so you get that. So in that case I'm not the single point, there are other people know but not within our team. Sometimes I feel it's a litlle bit hard that everyone should be broad or be able to take on all tasks beacuse of course there are people good at coding and who likes coding a lot. Of course I can do some coding but it will take me much more time, so it depends on what taskks we have in the team. We are trying to keep each other informaed about what we are doing both in coding and verification and stuff like taht. And trying to do pari work, not only pair programming soto say but pair work, beacuse we think it's both on a single point but also it's more fun to work together, then you can help out each other and perpahs sometimes 2 brains think better than 1, I don't know.
### How would you descibe the communication between the teams? Is it suficient?
In APC yeah, we have good communication between them.
### Do you see it anywhere else where it's not working as well as between the teams?
I can't really say that beacuse we are in our own little bubble so to say. We are 3 teams working with APC, it's very good functioning and we are all focused in one product. We are also situated in one area, so there are good communications betweenthose 3 teams that is no issues at all. But since we are sitting in that area we don't really have that knmowkedge about other, how are other teams working in NC for example.
### Would you say it affects you in any way that you don't know how other teams like NC for example are working?
Not really beacsue we are working with differetn products.
### but would you like to know nayway? Like, maybe share some practices or sometihing like that?
Of course, I think it's very good to sshare practices but I was actually talking about thaat right before this meeting that I think we as a compnay need to evalulate our information. We need to be more clear about what is tips & tricks and what is approved way of working and what  is our requirement. It's kind of different level of information and it should be very easy to... Tips & tricks, everybody shoud be able tp put up stuff there in ourder to collaborate better and "Well, try this one out. I tired and it worked". IOf course that's good but we also need to evaluate that we ahve some parts that should be a little bit more stiff to change. I'm not meaning that tis houlf be completely stuff, nit that, but they shoud be a little bit more so that you kind of make a suggestion and some people are reviewing this suggestion and say "This si good, lets put it in" noot just putting in aall the stuff that everybody comes up with, beacuse then it's kind of...And you actually after a while don't know which of this information is valid. Which one is still valid, which oone is approved. Tends to get a lot of information in and thatäs good beacuse then we also need to evaluate what kind of information it is. I think that is work that needs to be done in some way, because there are huge amounts of information in wikis and ericoll and stuff like that and some information should be really easy to change and easy to say "I think it's better to do this and do that" and communicate in different kind of ways. But we tendd to think that all information should be like that and I think that is wrong. I think some information should be a littl ebit more sctrict and a little bit "This is how we work, the definition of done is that you have done these 4 whatever it is", so that needs to be a little more stiff. So you shall of course change it if it's sufficinet I don't need that but it shouldn't be changed on a daily basis so to say or not by anyone that thinks "I have abetter idea"and it should be put in and evaluated "Is this a better isdea?", "Yes, it's truly a better one, lets put it in". So there is a difference. That is just one idea of how one could handle information better.
### But is the information that is in wikis accessible to people? It is easy to find correct information?
It's easily accesible, it's not always so easy to find valid information beacuse there are so munch information. So I would say sometimes it's not that easy and we are, we need to improve in that middle information that I'm talking about, that we really say that "We have decided that we will do this and this and that", that' sperhaps, that's not so easy to find, beacuse you could find 10 "We have deicded this and this and that" so which one is valid? That's a problome I think. At least it's very hard when you come in new. After a while you come upa nd you say "I have this one" "No no that one is not valid, you need to look at this one" "Oh, should I look at this one, how should I know?" "Well, that's the one that everybody uses" "ok...". So that's I don't htink that' s agood way to kind of, it should be more clear about that kind of imfromtaion, what kindo f information is approved and which is not and which is valid. Beacuse we really can't afford to run on anformatin that is not valid.