### What is your role in the organization and in the MS2 team?
In the organization I'm working in the MS2 team which is an XFT team and I mainly have the system role in that team.
### What are your key tasks and responsibilities?
I mainly work with the systemization and that means in different ways thinking about feature that we are implementing and update requirements regarding that one. Also, I spent a lot of time participating in pre-study which is before we actually get that into our product development phase where we mainly work. I've been working with a lot of pre-studies lately.
### Have you worked here before the transformation towards agile?
Yeah.
### Were your tasks different from what you are doing now?
Yes, a little bit, but perhaps not as much as one could think. But yeah, they were different.
### And now, in the agile environment, would you say that your responsibilities are clearly defined, your personally and XFT as a whole?
I didn't understand that.
### It is clear what the team is supposed to do, where does the responsibility end and where should you delegate it to some other roles?
Yeah, it's clear but also a little bit unclear, I would say. Because there are no approved process for the product development and we are really lacking that one and I think that that one is a key issue to really tell what responsibilities the team has.
### And in what way does it affect your way as a team?
Since we don't have that PD process we are sometimes getting really frustrated because we don't know in what way we should solve our tasks and we are not sure wether or not we are ready with the whole feature.
### What can be any other impediments for the team to work during the sprints?
Other impediments can be that it's hard to get ahold of people that you need to get information from or confirmation or whatever, that sometimes can take very long time. I see that we sometimes don't have open ways, communication ways, towards GSM and WDCMA so we are kind of struggling when we need to know something that we are trying "Oh, perhaps we could mail to that person" or mailing another one or third one and then perhaps… So in order to get an answer we could spend long time, we are of course doing other stuff, but long calendar time before you get your answer back. Sometimes that doesn't matter more than it is frustrating since you don't get your answer, but sometimes it's of course also affecting the development. It would be much better if we could get our answer a little bit earlier. The communication ways are unclear for some areas that we actually need to get confirmation from.
### Do you see any way  of how they can be more clearly defined?
Yes, you could clearly define them. If you are working with that process and all teams...Well, it's different steps that you need to do. If all team need to do step number 2, for example, and you would set up a weekly meeting for that task then you could just go to that meeting and say "Hello, I have this question.", "Ok, the answer is...", "Thank you" and then you could leave. You will of course have to wait for the meeting but that's a much shorter time than 3 weeks of calendar time of mailing and much less frustrating. So one could really help out the organization in having define communication ways so to say, then it would be easier. Well, this task and you go to that room by that day… or yeah, well,  not exactly like that, but... What one usually do it that one has a forum[???] in some way and you use a mail list to that one and say "I have a question about this" and then that would updown the agenda[6:00] and you get an answer in a couple of days. It would mostly take one week or perhaps no more than 10 days if you have those communications and you kind of put your errand there and just wait for the answer, you don't have to do that mailing and try to find the person and "No, this is not my responsibility". So those people in that meeting know this our responsibility to answer this question and they will do it. But that is...I mean  in a way it's not an agile way of working because you should take all the contacts you need by yourself and clearly discuss with persons in person. But when you get such a big organization as we have, if every team are to mail everyone about every task then it gets... We get very long lines for that conversations. So I think for a bigger organization one really has to help out to get bettwer communication ways.
### And if somebody finds a communication path, does he kind of communicate that he found a responsible person say for a range of issues?
Yeah. It tends to get that way but it's also, then it spreads a name in the organization and that person gets a lot of mails, a lot of questions. And it's very hard for that person to hand it over to someone else, because you are kind of personal responsible for.... Everybody thinks that you are responsible, not responsible, but everybody knows that you are a good person to ask, right? So you tend to get hundreds of mails with questions. So, by that I think in a big organization it is easier to work through different kind of foras[????], because in that case it's rather, it's more easy to shift over the responsibility to another person. And you also could, in that case you get some kind of mailbox, those kind of issues really get a mailbox and then you "Oh, now we have 10 issues of this one". Sometimes they kind of get lost when they are on personal level in an organization like this. So I think it's very good when you are rather few to work in that way but when the organization grows it's hard.
### If you were to pick 3-5 roles you communicate most frequently with, which roles would it be?
That would be OPO, the... what are they called...they are called TM...
### Technical managers?
Yeah, it's technical...Maria is one. I forgot what her role is, I can come back on that. I communicate with SPM, I also communicate with — not so much with a SPM but a little bit with him. CPI, because that's one of our, we have the responsibility to see that the CPI is done, we not doing it ourselves, but we are putting in stuff in that and reviewing them. How many did I say?
### 4 or 5... That's enough. Can you think of any event thats cause more communication than usually? More intense...
It varies because when you are in that CPI loop you have a lot of communication with those people that are writing the CPI and all that. Then you are going in the verification loop and you have a lot of communication with the test managers regarding what to test. So it varies a lot over time.
### Do you see any role or maybe any certain communication channel which tends to be a bottleneck in a way, that blocks the communication with other party?
Perhaps not that much, but the people that are TM in the projects, like Maria is, they are very-very busy, so there it takes long time to get confirmation. They have very-very many features to keep track of, but when something arise and get very hot, they are coming back, but if it's not that hot it takes long time, because they have such a full load on that.
### How tight is the communication between XFT and the OPO?
How...?
### Tight? Is it on a daily basis, what do you discuss normally.
OPO is discussing, I would say daily with our Scrum Master but not daily with the rest of the team, but we perhaps twice a week or once a week with the rest of the team. So some of the team has only communication with OPO when it's sprint planning and the Scrum Master has it more or less on a daily basis, because he comes and says something and then... So it depends really on what role you have in the team. I would say that I'm talking with him 3-4 times per week, that's not daily but not far from it, some people in our team are not talking with him at all. So it depends on.
### So you would you say that this kind of specialization you have inside your team, like you are doing system work and someone else is doing something really specific, does it harm your team?
No, I don't think it harms our team because in my team I am the only one with competence in system. But it would be of course, it is always better if you are not the single point of knowledge, so in that case it's better to kind of be pair-working even on system stuff also. But lately, we have been working with a pre-study that all three teams in APC is involved in and then we of course have 1 in each team so you get that. So in that case I'm not the single point, there are other people know but not within our team. Sometimes I feel it's a little bit hard with that everyone should be broad or be able to take on all tasks because of course there are people good at coding and who likes coding a lot. Of course I can do some coding but it will take me much more time, so it depends on what tasks we have in the team. We are trying to keep each other informed about what we are doing both in coding and verification and stuff like that. And trying to do pair work, not only pair programming so to say but pair work, because we think it's both on a single point but also it's more fun to work together, then you can help out each other and perhaps sometimes 2 brains think better than 1, I don't know.
### How would you describe the communication between the teams? Is it sufficient?
In APC yeah, we have good communication between them.
### Do you see it anywhere else where it's not working as well as between the teams?
I can't really say that, because we are in our own little bubble so to say. We are 3 teams working with APC, it's very good functioning and we are all focused in one product. We are also situated in one area, so there are good communications between those 3 teams that is no issues at all. But since we are sitting in that area we don't really have that much knowledge about other, how are other teams working in NC for example.
### Would you say it affects you in any way that you don't know how other teams like NC work?
Not really because we are working with different products.
### but would you like to know anyway? Like, maybe share some practices or something like that?
Of course, I think it's very good to share practices but I was actually talking about that right before this meeting that I think we as a company need to evaluate our information. We need to be more clear about what is tips & tricks and what is approved way of working and what is our requirement. It's kind of different level of information and it should be very easy to... Tips & tricks, that’s everybody should be able to put up stuff there in order to collaborate better and "Well, try this one out. I tired and it worked". Of course that's good but we also need to evaluate that we have some parts that should be a little bit more stiff to change. I'm not meaning that it should be completely stuff, not that, but they should be a little bit more so that you kind of make a suggestion and some people are reviewing this suggestion and say "This is good, lets put it in" not just putting in all the stiff that everybody comes up with, because then it's kind of...And you actually after a while don't know which of this information is value. Which one is still valid, which one is approved. Tends to get a lot of information in and that’s good because but we also need to evaluate what kind of information it is. I think that is work that needs to be done in some way, because there are huge amounts of information in Wikis and Ericolls and stuff like that and some information should be really easy to change and easy to say "I think it's better to do this and do that" and communicate in different kind of ways. But we tend to think that all information should be like that and I think that is wrong. I think some information should be a little bit more strict and a little bit "This is how we work, this is the definition of done that you have done these 4 whatever it is", so that needs to be a little bit more stiff. So you shall of course change it if it's sufficient I don't need that but it shouldn't be changed on a daily basis so to say or not by anyone that thinks "I have a better idea"and it should be put in and evaluated "Is this a better idea?", "Yes, it's truly a better one, lets put it in". So there is a difference. That is just one idea of how one could handle information better.
### But is the information which is in wikis accessible to people? It is easy to find correct information?
It's easily accessible, it's not always so easy to find valid information because there are so munch information. So I would say sometimes it's not that easy and we are, we need to improve in that middle information that I'm talking about, that we really say that "We have decided that we will do this and this and that", that's perhaps, that's not so easy to find, because you could find 10 "We have decided this and this and that" so which one is valid? That's a problem I think. At least it's very hard when you come in new. After a while you come up and you say "I have this one" "No no that one is not valid, you need to look at this one», "Oh, should I look at this one, how should I know?" "Well, that's the one that everybody uses" «Ok...". So that's I don't think that's a good way to kind of, it should be more clear about that kind of information, what kind of information is approved and which is not and which is valid. Because we really can't afford to run on information that is not valid.
### And how about your communication with your line management?
We have a new manager since a couple of weeks back. So... and it's kind of hard to answer cause that communication is rather new so I don't know if, I think he has claimed that he will be available. But I haven't, there hasn't been any reasons to check it if it's like that. So I can't really say... But as a manager he has said: "Just give me a text or mail me if you have a question, if you need stuff". So I guess it will be good but I haven't tried it out.
### And what were the reasons for changing it?
The old manager left.
### Ah, ok that part....
Yeah the old manager left in the end of January. And we were, we didn't have a the nearest position of manager were started in the middle of March. So we had him for three weeks or something like that. 
### How did it affect the team, not having a manager? Or did it affect the team in any way?
Yeah, I think it affected the team. Because we were, there were a lot where they could not put up the ad for the position because someone in India has not pushed a button. There were a new, new ways of doing all the ads and there were actually a lot of ads stuck because those who evaluate the ads were situated down in India and well of course, well they made a new system and they had a huge pile, a lot of things to do. And they weren't allowed to do it in the old way so everybody was kind of waiting for things to happen. And that of course… We knew that we needed a new manager but then it took four or five weeks and then it actually said "plop" and then our grandpa manager were able to have some interviews and then it just took a couple of weeks. But kind of, when you don't have a manager you, we didn't get, some of us were applying for vacation and we didn't get the vacation approved because we didn't have that manager. So there are stuff that the managers are doing that we were lacking. So we were, we thought it was good when they found a manager for us.
### Did it in any way affect the work of the team, apart from all the administrative aspects?
No, I would't say that because we are... the action work about features and stuff like that is run more through the OPO and ScM and in that loop about the TMs in the projects. So we are getting our work from that so in that case it weren't affecting us.
### To that extend are you involved in decisions around the backlog? Can you decide on what stories you are gonna do this sprint?
Yeah in some way actually. We have, in our three teams, we have divided the base load as we call it. We have to answer a mailbox, we have to do deliveries on our code and we also do regression tests on our code. So we divided that on the three teams, so each of one took a task. And on top of that we also have, right now we have the responsibility of the PDU, of developing software for a new hardware that is called PDU-0301 and that is a rather long one. So we have written stories about that one, a lot of stories then. When we are doing our sprint planning right now, we can go in there and say "Now we want to start on story 5, 8, 9. They are the most important right now". And then we are actually going to our OPO and say "We have chosen these stories, are there something you want to add, that you know that we need to add into the sprint?". So lately we are having a great influence about, not that we could take a completely new feature so to say, but we have a great influence on what we take, in what order what we take that feature, that is no one pointing to us. 
### And you're satisfied with this?
Yes I think it's rather good, because that gives us some kind of, we know that we are developing this one and we know that it will take a couple of months and we are able to plan and do our work in the way that we think it's good. I wouldn't say it would be better... but the sprint planning, that has improved a lot I think. When we at first started all the tasks were up on the table and then one team said "Ah, we like to do that" and another would say "We like do to that" and then we put that up on the board and then we'd say "Now you have very much and we have very few and we can take some of you because..." so the sprint planning took the whole afternoon, now we are doing it for half an hour or an hour and then we're checking the result with our OPO for half an hour and everyone knows what to do. So I think it's much better about sprint planning today.
### If you would have to define characteristics for a good sprint, can you think of something like "if we always have this, the sprint is gonna be good" and on the other hand "if this happens the sprint is gonna be bad"?
Oh, that was a hard question. I think it depends on how our team is, we are one... I have my main competence in system, we have one that has competence in verification and then we have three, four people... we are a rather small team right now: four people that are designers. So we found out that if we have a sprint with not that much coding in, then some of us think that we don't have that much fun work to do. And that tends to... then you get a more "Ok, we need to do that so lets do it then :|" kind of. So I would say it's a good sprint for us if we have coding but that's only depending on the people in our team so to say. It's not good if we only have administrative work in different kind of ways then people get annoyed I would say. Like we have a lot of documentation, systematization, a lot of mailing, a lot of trying to get an attribute in the MOM that could take ages. We work on preparing getting stuff into the MOM and we didn’t get that, so we... the preparation for getting it in took quite a while and a lot of thinking. And then we we got it denied so: «Ok let's start again, what to do now?». And that was of course frustrating as we were trying to do stuff that didn't come through. And we are also frustrated as I described in the communication way. That we need to get information from GSM and WCDMA and sometimes it's very very hard for us. So when there is some sprint that needs to get some confirmation then it's also starting to get angry and not angry but kind of annoyed. This is not working good kind of.
### And might there be any another external influences if you have the perfect setup already and then something comes up which kind of ruins everything? Is there such a thing which influences sprints externally or is it shielded?
No, it's not shielded: we could get other stuff in but that usually comes from the OPO then. Then he comes along and says we need to do that and usually that haven't been so much that we had to break the sprint but we could take it in and prioritize and perhaps not being ready with all the stuff that we thought we should have been ready with. So I don't know if there are, yeah we have a new organization ongoing that is of course something sprint breaking but I mean that is not common that usually happens once a year or twice a year. So that's not that much for your thesis about... sprint breaking stuff.
### And how much vision of the whole product is communicated to the team? How much far ahead do you know what you're going to do?
No that far that we want to know. We have been... before I would say one year ago that was communicated much much more and now it's no communication in that area. And we have said that we are lacking it... We think it’s… sad is not the right word but we are kind of a little bit frustrated because we don't get that information and it's so much funnier if you get the information where the product is heading and what's affecting the product. But we are not discussing the product that much as we would like to do.
### Do you know why it is not communicated?
No... Perhaps because the person that is PO doesn’t think it is important. The PO changed one year ago and perhaps... but we actually don't know. We have been trying to say that it's good for the spirit around the product, it's good about knowledge, it's good about if you could get information. But we are very close to hardware and that would be good also that someone could tell us that new hardware is coming in in autumn. Because some of the hardware guys is one floor down and if someone were to tell us then we, when you're meeting them at lunch then you could ask then "I heard about this one and we are going to work with that could we...". So knowledge about where the product is going is very good if you have because it is getting some kind of... I don't know the English word for that but you get kind of an overview of the surroundings in some way. And then you know when stuff happens and can have a ear there or start talking at the coffee machine. So we, in our team we think that is very sad that that is not been that much. So we were actually talking in our retro that we were thinking about... We had something called APC techno before and that was a place where we brought up different knowledge, general knowledge so to say. So we thought perhaps we could drive that techno and start to invite people to tell us about those things. But that was only 2-3-4 weeks ago and we haven't started that yet but that was a thought. Since we are lacking that information we thought perhaps we could somehow get it, try to get it ourselves and then communicate it to our other teams, APC teams. So that was just a thought about it.
### Is there any other kind of information that you are lacking, any communication channel that you are lacking as well as you wish?
I can't really come up with something right now. We have divided the product guardian area but I think that has worked rather well. No I can't, right now.
### How are you as an XFT are sharing information with other, with anyone?
Yeah, we were part of the team exhibition on Wednesday and we share knowledge at… we have a sprint review that we have together with the other teams and then we have a presentation of what we have done. About the feature and where we are going but a lot of stuff. And each team has that kind of presentation so that's a very good opportunity to actually know about the other teams and that's how we communicate our work also. Then before we also had that APC techno and if we had something on that sprint review that we thought needed more discussion or more presentation then we brought it up on the techno. So we think that it's, that techno has not been there for half a year or something so we are missing it.
### And how does the empowerment of XFTs and giving them many responsibilities affect you? Would you like to have less responsibilities in some way?
No, but I would like to know my responsibilities. And since there are not a good process about product development you actually don't know your responsibilities. And they are kind of saying, they are talking about end-to-end, that you should have responsibility end-to-end but if you don't tell us where it starts and where it stops then and what is the supposed outcome of this...
### And if you take a look at the organisation as a whole, do you see any entities in the organisation that are maybe not compatible with agile way of working?
I couldn't tell, really I don't have that knowledge.
### I think I am through. Maybe you're concerned with something we didn't ask about?
No, you have to ask the question. I am only answering the question. I don't know what you're after.
### Have you ever been in contact with your APO?
Yes I have.
### Was it very not frequent, would you like to see more?
No, that's not frequent at all. Yeah I am actually hoping that the re-organisation of the RAs where they are forming new requirement areas. They have put up new APOs on that one, I think one is aiming for… The thoughts about this new requirement areas are good because they are making one that is called «infrastructure» and one is called «configuration features» — I don't remember that one, but what they are trying to do is to actually put the main requirement, the MR for something that is coming up in the infrastructure and that MR will both include hardware and software. Because nowadays we kind of having a problem cause hardware is doing the hardware and putting it out on in the field. And we are doing software and I think we are running after cause I think we are going «Oh, is that one on its way out to the field? In that case we have to do the software in order to support it». And I think that software should be done before because if it is done a little bit before then you could actually verify both: software and hardware together before you are putting it out. And now its, of course it's verified but not to, so extended verification, because you kind of get it too late. You are running your tests of course on it, it's not that but it could be more extended if the software was ready a little bit earlier because in that case what hardware could do their verification with real software and that's much better. Now they are putting these two tasks together in one MR to get the hardware and the software together for the same product and that is one good thing because it might be one area that we are communicating too little and it is with hardware. Where are they heading, where are they going. The OPO is doing that but I think be should have better knowledge.
# Ok, thank you. 